---
date: "2022-06-09"
type: "sri-lang"
title: "Playing around with Syntax"
---
### Grammar and Keywords for Sri-Lang

There are multiple approaches we could take when 'inventing' new syntax for a language.

The final syntax should enable the end goal of the language which is to make it easier for students to grasp basic programming concepts before moving on to a more powerful language. 

One possiblity would be to make is close to English as possible. But this comes with the disadvantage of 'incorrect' grammer. 

### English grammer and programming syntax.

Programming languages have natually evolved to follow the grammer structure of English(and similar languages).

For example:
In English an conditional sentence is structued as: "If <conditional>, <verb> <subject>" (ex - if it is raining, use an umbrella)
This translates nicely into C-family syntax

```c
if(condition) {
    // branch logic
}
```

But in Sinhalese, a conditional would be structured differently: "<conditional> if, <subject> <verb>" (ex - වහිනවා නම් කුඩයක් ගේන්න)
Translating this directly would not make a lot of sense. 

### Keywords

Sinhalese, Tamil(along with a lot of other South Asian languages), have distinct written and spoken versions. Today I learned that this is described as [diglossia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diglossia).

This makes it difficult to to decide on the language syntax. There a few approaches we could take here:

- Use written Sinhala syntax
- Use the naming from ICT syllabus
    - This would be using written version.
    - This would translate nicely for anyone learning ICT in Sinhalese.
    - The syntax maybe a bit more difficult for a beginer to grasp. 
- Use spoken Sinhala syntax
    - Would be easier to pick up for anyone

### Playing around with Syntax

```
ලියන්න("ලෝකයට ආයුබෝවන්")

විචල්ය නම = අහන්න("ඔබේ නම කුමක්ද?");
ලියන්න("ආයුබෝවන් " + නම);

ශ්‍රිතය එකතු_කරන්න(අ,ආ) {
    ආපසු අ + ආ;
}

function fixxBuzz(x) {
    if(x % 5 === 0 && x % 3 === 0) {
        return 'fizzbuzz';
    } else if (x % 5 === 0) {
        return 'fizz';
    } else if (x % 3 === 0) {
        return 'buzz';
    } else {
        return;
    }
}

ශ්‍රිතය ෆීස්_බස්(අංකය) {
    (අංකය % 5 === 0 && අංකය % 3 === 0) නම් {
        ආපසු 'ෆීස්බස්';
    } එසේ නොවී (අංකය % 5 === 0) නම් {
        ආපසු 'ෆීස්';
    } නැත්නම් (අංකය % 3 === 0) නම් {
        ආපසු 'බස්';
    } නැත්නම් {
        ආපසු;
    }
}

for(let i = 0; i < 10; i++) {

}

(විචල්ය අ = 0; අ < 10; අ++) සදහා {

}

while(i < 0) {
    i++;
}

(අ < 0) සත්‍ය වන තුරා {
    අ++;
}
```